When to create a new PID?
=========================

Instruments can be changed or modified over time. For example, when a
component is changed or an instrument is upgraded to meet new
requirements in measurement capability. Defining the exact moment when a
new PID should be created is challenging because different stakeholders
will have different reasons for each evolution. Indeed the PIDINST WG
has not been able to settle on a definitive answer. Thus to accommodate
varying stakeholder needs, it is recommended that a PID will evolve when
there is a significant change in context that is important to an
institutional instrument provider. Significant changes might include
when an instrument is cited in the literature and changes, there is a
need to preserve the instrument history, major changes in measurement
capability that affect automated workflows such as quality control, or
modifications to an instrumentâ€™s firmware etc. Whatever the reason an
institution chooses to create new PIDs, it is recommended that
instrument providers identify the succession in the PIDINST metadata
schema using the *relatedIdentifier* property with a *relationType*
attribute *IsNewVersionOf* for the new PID and, *IsPreviousVersionOf*
for the superceded PID as shown in Snippet 8.1 and 8.2.

(1)

.. code-block:: XML

      <relatedIdentifiers>
         <relatedIdentifier relatedIdentifierType="DOI" relationType="IsNewVersionOf">10.4232/10.CPoS-2013-02en</relatedIdentifier>
      </relatedIdentifiers>



(2)

.. code-block:: XML

      <relatedIdentifiers>
         <relatedIdentifier relatedIdentifierType="DOI" relationType="IsPreviousVersionOf">http://hdl.handle.net/21.T11998/0000-001A-3905-F</relatedIdentifier>
      </relatedIdentifiers>


**Snippet 8.1:** The use of the relatedIdentifier property to represent
(1) superseding and (2) superseded PID records in XML



(1)

.. code-block:: JSON

      [{
        "RelatedIdentifier":{
          "RelatedIdentifierValue":"10.4232/10.CPoS-2013-02en",
          "RelatedIdentifierType": "DOI",
          "relationType":"IsNewVersionOf"
        }
      }]


(2)

.. code-block:: JSON

      [{
        "RelatedIdentifier":{
          "RelatedIdentifierValue":"http://hdl.handle.net/21.T11998/0000-001A-3905-F",
          "RelatedIdentifierType": "DOI",
          "relationType":"IsPreviousVersionOf"
        }
      }]



**Snippet 8.2:** The use of the relatedIdentifier property to represent
(1) superseding and (2) superseded PID records in JSON
